Integrating Lean Thinking into Design Thinking With First-Year Engineering Design Course

 Abstract:
Engineering design is a process aimed at addressing a problem in a systematic way. It starts with this fundamental question that what is the human necessity behind a design? Design Thinking helps students to be critical and empathic thinkers who seek innovative methods to address real societal needs. Lean Thinking is another method that creates a system to increase efficiency in a process. In a pilot study and for a first year Introduction to Engineering Design course, we have combined Design Thinking with Lean Thinking to provide students with more effective tools necessary for any problem solving process. This attempt appears to have energized the students and helped them with the understanding of the difference between value-added and wasteful activities in the design process that highlights the importance of the engineering design approach.

 SECTION I.
Introduction

As technology advances with exceedingly high speed, society faces demands with increasing complexities. The 21- century challenges require multidisciplinary or interdisciplinary approaches to address them. For example, recently developed concepts are being are being integrated into everyday life such as microgrids, Internet of Things (IoT), robotic and high-bandwidth communication systems, wearable electronic devices, cyber security, gene editing, and 3D-printed body organs. As a response, society has to take measurements toward safety, accuracy, agility, resilience and reliability. These processes should also address climate change, pandemics and social unrest which deepen the intricate demands faced by society. These challenges call for a new-generation of designers and problem solvers; those who understand innovation well, and can apply critical thinking in an insightful and nuanced way. Students not only need to apply intelligence and critical thinking, but also emotional intelligence (EQ). These pivotal skills do not usually come naturally and often need to be learned. These skills should be integrated into the teaching curricula across different disciplines including the engineering. Engineering is progressively becoming less of a stand-alone subject and is being integrated with other disciplines. Other disciplines are influencing and being incorporated into engineering curricula in order to increase the competence of the engineering graduates. These evolving changes are in response to industry demands for management, business strategy, marketing, philosophy, communication, ethics, environmentalism, and sustainability [1] .

Introduction to Engineering Design courses for first year engineering students have a critical mission; to teach first-year engineering students how to design in a systematic way. Students are introduced to the engineering design process. Details of the steps in the engineering design process have many variations, but all describe the interactive process of 1) Needs assessment, 2) Problem formulation, 3) Abstraction, 4) Analysis, and 5) Implementation (see Fig. 1 ).

Fig. 1 - Five stages of the design process. This iterative process that can be applied to almost any challenge starts with needs assessment to understate the unsatisfactory situation, and the process continues through implementation. 

 Lean Thinking is another problem-solving approach that has a process of its own. Lean Thinking, that is originated from Toyota Production System (TPS) [2] . Lean Thinking has the goal of optimizing any given process by first specifying the value of a process and then eliminating wasteful activities that absorb resources but do not contributed to the value. It is based on two guiding principles: continuous improvement and respect for the people involved in the process [3] .

The purpose of this study was to do a pilot trial to introducing both the engineering design process (Design Thinking) with the new Lean Thinking.

When Design Thinking is introduced in an educational course, theory and activities are structured to have students to brainstorm, think out-of-the-box, design, build and test a prototype. Course activities have the students practice group discussion and forming ideas that at first seem like wild ideas, but later the ideas are transformed to feasible solutions. Design Thinking brings Active Learning (AL) into the classrooms where students participate in identifying their learning styles, how to work in groups, and push boundaries as necessary for creative thinking. At the same time, Lean Thinking complements and enhances the process of Design Thinking.

As a pilot trial, we introduced first year students in an Introduction to Engineering Design to Lean Thinking. The Lean Thinking was used to enhance what the students were learning about Design Thinking.

Design Thinking is useful in tackling problems that are illdefined or unknown, by re-framing the problem in humancentric ways, creating many ideas in brainstorming sessions, and adopting a hands-on approach in prototyping and testing [4] . This method of thinking helps engineering students to approach problems in such a way that is different from traditional methods. One of the key aspects of Design Thinking is to incorporate empathy into the process of the design. Designing with empathy is what separates a human-centered product from one that lacks empathy. By intertwining empathy into the design process, the designer connects with the thoughts and feelings of the users. In such dynamic, users are considered as individuals and not as pieces of data.

At our institution, the Introduction to Engineering Design is a freshman course whose main mission is to strengthen students’ critical-thinking and problem-solving skills. Students are encouraged to be innovative in proposing solutions or designing products that address a societal or customer demand. Innovation, problem solving and critical thinking are key skills for a successful engineer but they need to be taught and fostered as they do not come naturally. Innovation as a learning process embeds Design Thinking. It allows those who are not trained as designers to utilize creative tools to address a vast range of challenges. Additionally, it strengthen them to accept possible repeated failures. When boundaries are not set, students force themselves to use their creative thinking.

This first year Introduction to Engineering Design course provided the platform for a pilot study to integrate ideas of Lean Thinking with the concept of the engineering design process. 
 SECTION II.
Design Thinking

In our pilot trial, Design Thinking was described as an iterative design process. The stages of Design Thinking were integrated with Kolb’s Experiential Learning Theory. Kolb’s Experiential Learning starts with students understanding their natural learning preference(s) [5] . Students knowing their learning preference is useful when working in teams and trouble-shooting engineering problems that are convergent and divergent in nature. It also helps students in recognizing their peers’ learning styles which leads to constructive dialogue and increases collaboration.

Kolb Learning Style describes the ways that each learner uniquely spirals through the experiential learning cycle. There is no right or wrong way on how a learner spirals through the experiential learning cycle and each person has their own preferred path. Research has shown learning styles are influenced by a persons culture, personality type, educational specialization, career choice, and current job role or tasks [5] , [6] .
Small activities with extensive goals

Design Thinking was structured into the course with a set of leaning activities. The activities guided students through the Kolb learning styles and practice Design Thinking techniques through a few small activates or workshops. Below are two examples

    Lego Activity: This activity was an individual effort and its focus is for students to pay strict attention to how they may start a design. For instance, some students preferred to do research first, others liked to draw a model, and some dive into the project and start building. Each approach was based on one of Kolbs learning styles. Understanding how one approaches a new learning experience helped in metacognitive development.

    Balloon-Powered Vehicle: This activity was a teamwork effort where students were divided into teams of three to build a balloon powered vehicle. Student were asked to first share their learning styles with the team members and how they would approach a new learning experience. This dialogue helped in creating a culture of mutual understanding and respect for different learners which cultivated clear communication and fosters empathy among students. 

In addition to these mentioned examples, smaller activities such as group discussions regarding team dynamics and Bono’s Six Thinking Hats [7] were performed in every class meeting during the first few weeks of the semester. These activities seemed to improve students’ performance in terms of being productive members of a team.

We developed projects and activities to introduce the goals of Lean Thinking as well. For example, students were asked to do a two-second Lean project [8] . The goal of the project was for the students to slightly optimize a process of their choice (school or daily-life related) but in a creative and innovative way. Another example of a Lean-related activity is shown below.
One activity to enhance Lean Thinking

    Game of Puzzle: This activity was a teamwork effort consisted of several turns. In each turn, every team does a 25-piece jigsaw puzzle whose pieces were randomly mixed. The goal of the activity was not to construct a puzzle but to reduce the time of puzzle-making process. This was a Lean Thinking activity and although a simple one, it taught students to look at every process as a system. Processes could be optimized and systems could be improved. Inefficient (wasteful) actions could be reduced in order to increase the value (efficiency) of a system. These positive outcomes were achievable if all members of a team work closely and plan a road map together. This activity showed the positive effect of goal setting; how short sprints towards the goal, incorporated with continuous improvements were effective. 

SECTION III.
Lean Thinking

The aim of Lean Thinking is to optimize any given process by first specifying the value in the process and then eliminating wasteful activities that absorb resources but create no value. Lean thinking defines value and waste in a process where waste is divided into 8 categories (see Fig. 2 ): 1. Overproduction, doing work before it is needed, 2. Inventory, Items or information not being processed, 3. Defects, mistakes and errors that need to be reworked, 4. Transportation, unnecessary movements of items or information, 5. Waiting, wasted time waiting for information or items to arrive, 6. Motion, unnecessary movements by people, 7. Extra-processing, more work or higher quality than is required by the customer. 8. Non utilized talent, under-utilizing peoples’ talents, skill sets and knowledge. 

 Using Lean methodology in a classroom environment opened up new perspectives for the students where they became aware of the differences between a value-added work and a wasteful action. Students could utilize Lean Thinking to almost any process of their professional or personal lives (e.g. doing an assignment/project, studying a course-related topic, managing school schedule) to obtain more efficient results in shorter periods of time. At the same time, it was important for the teacher to focus on value-added actions and on reducing wasteful activities both inside and outside the classroom. When students were introduced to the Lean Thinking, they started observing the instructor’s work and the classroom dynamics more closely. If encouraged, students provided feedbacks on the values and wastes they saw in their educational environment or in their relation with the instructor. This dynamic relationship brought clarity to the student-instructor alliance, helped the instructor to address the areas that students needed the most assistance with and encouraged students to be active members of the classroom. In the University of Iceland, a small number of industrial engineering students (seventeen 3rd-year students), who were taught Lean methodology, were asked to provide feedbacks on value-adding (effective) and wasteful (ineffective) teaching methods. Students found the method they received in another classroom value adding and this was the method: a subject matter was taught in small portions, an assignment was given after the explanation of each piece, a short review was provided after the completion of the assignment. One of the results of this study was that after learning about Lean Thinking, students became better observers where they saw teaching methods as processes needed to be optimized if efficient outcomes were of interest.

In our pilot trial of exploring Lean Thinking in the first year introduction to engineering design course, 30 freshman electrical and computer engineering students, were introduced to the principles of Lean Thinking. They were asked to provide feedbacks on the effectiveness of utilization of the principles of ”Lean Thinking” in their daily school or personal lives:

    90 % of the students found the Lean Thinking effective.

    55 % of the students actively used those principles in their personal and professional lives. 

A few of the students voluntarily provided additional detailed examples of non-optimized processes that they encounter on a daily basis. For instance they expressed their observations of wastes (inefficiencies) in the process of making food at the school’s cafeteria, how they get ready to attend their classes or how they organize their school work. Based on Lean thinking and Toyota Production System, most existing systems seem to have 90% waste and 10% value. Therefore, most process can be improved by applying the principles of Lean Thinking to eliminate wasteful activities to maximize the value.
SECTION IV.
Combination of Lean and Design Thinking

Taking on a self-directed student project requires addressing many details such as organizing thoughts, managing time, and maintaining a direction that leads toward an attainable, measurable and time-bound goal. These would be challenging tasks for an experienced professional, let alone for freshman students whose high school academic backgrounds fills a wide spectrum. Teaching students useful and tangible techniques that help them with approaching a project and concluding the tasks successfully is not a simple mission.

The 5 phases of design process, as illustrated in Fig. 1 , are useful techniques to address a need and to design, prototype, and test. However, there seems to be a need for additional resources on how to execute each phase of the Design Thinking successfully. A student does not find it easy to be creative thinkers or designers of original products or concepts. Implementing different stages of Design Thinking may also not be an easy task.

Lean Thinking can serve as a segue that helps students with better understanding of Design Thinking terminologies. In our pilot trial, students were observed to relate to the Lean methodology more naturally. Lean Thinking encouraged critical thinking and problem-solving skills like Design Thinking does but in a different and relatively easier way to understand manner. In addition, one of the two guided principals in Lean thinking is respect for people, which correlates with one of the key aspects of Design Thinking: namely empathy.

As mentioned in Sec. III , Lean Thinking defines value and wast in a process; by focusing on the value, the process will become more efficient. Applying Lean Thinking to Design Thinking results in creating useful methods established to optimize the duration of the design process and to create an MVP (Minimum Viable Product) which can be tried and tested by the market [9] .
SECTION V.
Discussion and Further Directions

Our pilot study showed that introducing Lean Thinking in conjunction with Design Thinking made students motivated to search for creative ways in a design process. Lean Thinking appeared to compliment objectives on Design Thinking. It strengthened the structure of the Introduction to Engineering Design course and made the goals of the course more achievable.

We would like to integrate Lean Thinking into other engineering courses as well. Optimizing a system’s performance or the result of a procedure is of importance in any engineering-related work whether analytical or design focused. For this reason the combination of Design Thinking and Lean Thinking prepares engineering students to address life’s challenges more efficiently and successfully. 