Learning Agile Scrum Methodology Using the Groupware Tool Trello Through Collaborative Working

Agile is a project management philosophy for collaborative working which consists of a set of values and principles that can be employed in any sector. It is adopted by the software development community a long time ago and now several methodologies based on agile principles have become established as a method of software development. These agile based software development methodologies have developed as an integral part of the software engineering and software development curricula for many computing degree courses. One such agile based methodology is Scrum which is widely used in the software industry and thus in teaching. Several agile Scrum tools are available for software development, however, for teaching and learning purposes, this would not be affordable for many institutions due to its cost or learning curve. This necessitates the requirement for a free or open-source Scrum tool without any learning curve. Trello which is a free project management and collaborative working tool but not particularly designed for Scrum. However, its functionality and features can be transformed to make it a basic Scrum tool for teaching and learning purposes at no cost. This paper presents a systematic development and application of Trello-based agile Scrum methodology not just for teaching and learning purposes but for real project development. It is employed in the delivery of the software engineering module in BSc courses and subsequently, in the development of the BSc final year project at Bournemouth University, UK. This implementation of Trello-based agile Scrum methodology in the project development is compared against the simple agile Scrum based project development practice to demonstrate the success and learning improvement of this proposed methodology.
Keywords

    Agile Scrum methodology
    Trello
    Groupware
    e-learning
    Software engineering
    Collaborative working


Introduction

Software engineering methodologies and their application in project development is a key element of learning and accomplishing the computing degree. Today, agile is one of the most successful software development approaches employed by the majority of software development companies [1]. As a result, the teaching focus has moved towards the learning of various types of agile methodologies such as Scrum, eXtreme Programming (XP), Crystal and Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM), and away from the traditional methodologies [13, 21]. Amongst all, Scrum is the most popular agile methodology employed in software development by a large number of software development companies [9, 11, 16]. While teaching software engineering concepts and these agile methodologies, it is equally important for students to understand the methodology in a way that they can employ in their actual project development at later stage. If the teaching and learning is based on practicals and utilises some tools or apps then it would be more effective than simply learning concepts without any learning aids, this is especially true for the kinaesthetic learner [5, 12]. Teaching agile Scrum practicals is possible as there are several commercial tools available for use, however, they are mostly utilised by large software development companies due to their high price. This necessitates the requirement to resource a free or open source tool for teaching and learning the Scrum methodology. There are many free project management tools available; however, they are not particularly designed to implement agile Scrum methodology, nevertheless some can be utilised for it. One such tool is Trello, a project management and collaborative working tool which is not specifically designed for agile Scrum methodology. Nonetheless, it has potential to be utilised as an agile Scrum tool, which requires a careful transformation of the features of Trello into its corresponding components of the agile Scrum methodology. However, there is no proven research relating to Trello being used as an agile Scrum tool in the past including in the teaching and learning arena.

Therefore, this paper presents a systematic development and application of Trello-based agile Scrum methodology for both a teaching and learning and real-life project development. In this Trello-based agile Scrum methodology, three main components of Trello: Boards, Lists and Cards are transformed into agile Scrum components. The Trello board is considered as an agile Scrum project on which the entire Scrum team is working; Lists are utilised to design various backlogs: product backlog, release backlog and sprint backlog; and cards are used to represent the tasks or features (i.e. user stories). Subsequently, this Trello-based developed methodology is utilised in teaching of agile Scrum methodology in the Software Engineering module of the BSc course at Bournemouth University, UK. Finally, this Trello-based agile Scrum methodology is adopted for the BSc final year computing project which is sponsored by industry partners. The analysis of the project results revealed a significant improvement in the overall performance (i.e. each individual student) and this Trello-based practical and collaborative working assisted all students in understanding, clarifying and correcting their project activities in a timely manner.

The remaining paper consists of the following sections: Sect. 2 explains the agile Scrum methodology; Sect. 3 discusses Trello and its important features; Sect. 4 present the development and delivery of agile Scrum methodology using Trello; Sect. 5 presents the application of this Trello-based methodology in project development. Section 6 presents the results and analysis of this Trello-based agile Scrum methodology; Sect. 7 presents the summary of the paper and possible future work.

 Development and Delivery of Agile Scrum Methodology Using Trello

Trello is a project management and collaboration system which can be used for various purposes where team working is required. Trello is not an agile Scrum tool but it has several similarities with the popular agile Scrum tools and can be a free alternative for expensive agile Scrum tools. However, there is no proven research of Trello being used as an agile Scrum tool in the past, even for teaching and learning purposes. Therefore, this section presents a systematic development of Trello-based agile Scrum methodology for teaching and learning purposes and for the real life project development. In this Trello-based methodology, three main components of Trello Boards, Lists and Cards are transformed into agile Scrum components. The Trello board is considered as an agile Scrum project on which entire team is working, Lists are utilised to design various backlogs: product backlog, release backlog and sprint backlog, and cards are used to represents the tasks or features (i.e. user stories).

Figure 2 shows a template of an agile Scrum project and its components developed on the Trello board. This example Scrum project consists of seven components in the form of seven lists and three Scrum team members. The first component is the product backlog which contains several example tasks from the user stories and prioritised as high, medium and low priority. Later, this complete product backlog is divided into two release backlogs and each release backlog is divided into two sprints. To aid learning about the Trello-based sprint design, an example sprint is shown in Fig. 3 explaining its associated components in the form of Trello features. It also contains the most critical sprint component a burndown chart to show the current progress of this sprint to everyone. Those who are not a member of the Scrum development team (e.g. product owner and other stakeholders) can subscribe to the complete sprint to get regular updates, therefore, they know the current status of the sprint. Finally, each task is designed on the Trello card utilising all the card features as shown in the example task in Fig. 4. It contains several features such as due date, checklist, attachment, description, watch and comment, which are very useful for managing and communicating about the task.

This developed Trello-based agile Scrum methodology is very useful in teaching software development methodologies through a practical approach, by students applying their learning of the agile Scrum methodology to the given scenario of the project case study in a collaborative manner. This Trello-based developed methodology is utilised in teaching of agile Scrum methodology in the Software Engineering module of the BSc course at Bournemouth University, UK. Students develop a complete Scrum project in Trello based on the given scenario as a part of their learning, therefore, they are able to apply this knowledge in their final year project at a later stage. This practical approach of learning the agile Scrum methodology provides the students with greater opportunities to work as team, communicate and discuss with each other solving the problem, and designing an acceptable solution in a limited time. The successful implementation of this practical approach based on Trello is demonstrated in the next section where its application for the BSc final year project is discussed.


5 Practical Application of Trello Based Agile Scrum Methodology in the Development of Real Projects

This developed Trello-based agile Scrum methodology adopted for the BSc final year computing projects at Bournemouth University, and are sponsored by industry partners. Students complete these complex engineering or computing projects towards the partial fulfilment of the requirements to obtain their BSc degree alongside industry training. The project is a year-long assignment consisting of 2–3 students working as a group on a collaborative piece of academic work which produces a project prototype and final project report. The projects arise from suggestions proposed by industry partners, with the person proposing the project becoming the sponsor for the project team representing the industry partner. In addition to the industry partner, an in-house tutor is allocated to ensure that students gain practical industry skills by working on this extended project and that academic standards and a suitable learning environment is provided to allow the students to investigate an engaging, complex problem in a safe learning environment. This Project Based Learning (PBL) method assists students in developing teamwork and problem-solving skills in addition to the ability to communicate effectively with a variety of stakeholders at varying levels within the organisation [6, 7].

The agile Scrum development methodology is selected due to the time constraint for the development of the project. During this development, students are required to maintain a number of records in a collaborative working environment. Having been taught the developed Trello-based agile Scrum methodology during their Software Engineering module of their course, where students are taught the methodology. Trello was demonstrated as a groupware and web based tool for structuring and managing the stages and components of the project through the use of the Scrum methodology in a collaborative manner. This collaborative working requires regular interaction and communication amongst the project team which typically consists of the project sponsor (external- industry expert and can be considered as a product owner), the project tutor (internal- subject expert and can be considered as a Scrum master), and a number of students (can be considered as a Scrum development team). The first task is to prepare a proposal based on meetings with both external and internal supervisors and the team. They seek to establish the requirements and user stories, in order to begin the design process, producing the first component of the project, the Terms of Reference (ToR). The students utilise Trello to manage the communication amongst all the members of the project team and their internal and external sponsors. This means that when meetings are held with these stakeholders, everyone is informed of the progress to-date as Trello constantly sends updates of the progress made to the project team. This leads to more targeted meetings addressing meaningful issues thus reducing wasted time in the meetings.

As soon as they start their project development and build their user stories as a part of their product backlog in Trello, which is communicated to all the team members as they are uploaded to Trello. These user stories once verified by the team and the internal and external stakeholders forms the initial product backlog and once complete, means the project can progress to the next stage of the process. Subsequently, the product backlog is split into number of release backlogs and sprints depending on the requirement of the project with mutual negotiations. Every sprint is a shippable product and its progress is managed in Trello through the burndown chart. This burndown chart is created at the beginning of each sprint and updated regularly to inform of any change/ update in the sprint throughout the sprint life cycle. Upon completion of the sprint, it is reviewed by the external sponsor alongside the internal tutor during the sprint review meeting. If both are content and said DoD (Definition of Done) then the project team proceeds to the development of the next sprint. The same process is repeated for all the sprints until the project is complete. It cannot be underestimated the value of utilising Trello and the skills and experience gained from employing an agile Scrum software development methodology in a real-life project. The Trello software works well in this collaborative environment and due to its clean and user-friendly intuitive UI, it is effortless to learn and assimilate. Therefore, teaching time is minimal and students can produce meaningful information efficiently and effortlessly [8].

Furthermore, Students make use of Trello to maintain their Project Development Records (PDR), which are records of progress, thoughts and issues, held on Trello, these can easily be compiled into their PDR for presentation on project completion. In addition, internal and external tutor contact is maintained and where coaching intervention is required by academic staff, it can be provided promptly through Trello. Overall, the experience of using Trello for managing a complex, problem-solving challenge has been successful, with overall project marks improving from one year to the next. Moreover, it has brought together skills they have learned during their Software Engineering lectures and allowed the students to apply the agile Scrum methodology and free software tools (Trello) to the project work in a groupware and e-learning environment.


6 Results and Analysis

The previous section explained the successful development and delivery of the Trello-based agile Scrum methodology in the Software Engineering module, and later its application into the BSc final year projects. Having introduced this methodology, it was important to investigate the effect and success of this Trello-based methodology. Therefore, the project results when Trello-based methodology is employed were further analysed and compared against project results when agile Scrum methodology is also employed for the project but without Trello. This whole process was employed in practice for the two cohorts, therefore their projects results were compared against the previous cohort who developed their projects using agile Scrum methodology but without Trello based learning. There was a slight improvement in the overall project results (<2%) for both cohorts but it was not a significant finding for Trello-based methodology because this improvement could be attributed to several other components of the project. However, when the results for both cohorts were examined in more detail and a grouped frequency distribution analysis performed, there was an interesting pattern seen in both results when compared with and without Trello-based agile Scrum methodology. The use of Trello-based agile Scrum in project development showed a significant improvement in the overall performance (i.e. each individual student) of class with minimum standard deviation for the both cohorts as shown in Figs. 5 and 6. This was encouraging because it showed that the Trello-based practicals and collaborative working helped all students in understanding, clarifying and correcting their project activities in a timely manner. Trello-based agile Scrum methodology was one of the major components of the project throughout its life cycle, however, the completion of the actual project requires several other stages and is important for its success. For this reason, analysing the results and its improvement may not explicitly reflect the success of the Trello-based methodology but the improvement in the class performance (i.e. each individual student) is a strong indication of the success of this proposed methodology [10]. Nonetheless, in the future, it is important to explicitly evaluate the effect and success of this Trello-based methodology in the development of the project by creating a separate mechanism for its evaluation.

Grouped frequency distribution of project results using with and without Trello-based agile Scrum methodology for Cohort1


7 Conclusion

This paper presented the development of a Trello-based agile Scrum methodology, where Trello features were transformed to convert it to a basic Scrum tool for teaching and learning purposes at no cost. Later, it was employed in the delivery of the software engineering module in BSc courses and subsequently, in the development of the BSc final year project at Bournemouth University, UK. The effect and success of this Trello-based methodology was evaluated by comparing the project results of the two cohorts with and without Trello-based Scrum methodology. The comparative analysis of the project results revealed a significant improvement in the overall performance (i.e. each individual student) and this Trello-based practical and collaborative working helped all students in understanding, clarifying and correcting their project activities in a timely manner. Nonetheless, in the future, it is important to explicitly evaluate the effect and success of this Trello-based methodology in the development of the project by creating a separate mechanism for its evaluation. Additionally, it would be more useful to develop some case studies of this Trello-based agile Scrum methodology, which could be incorporated into this Trello-based method.